.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
.TH DNS 1 "2026-05-12" "v0.1.0" "Flux Manual"
.SH NAME
dns \- DNS selector and network configurator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dns
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ COMMAND ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dns
is a DNS selector and network configurator CLI for Linux and BSD.
It detects the active DNS/NTP subsystem, applies encrypted DNS
(DoT/DoH/DoQ/DNSCrypt), optionally configures NTP, and orchestrates
VPN clients (Cloudflare WARP, AdGuard VPN CLI).
.PP
When run without a command in an interactive terminal, an optional
TUI interface is launched for interactive provider/protocol selection.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-format " " \fIFORMAT\fR
Set output format. Supported values:
.BR json ", " jsonl ", " yaml ", " csv ", " human ", " explore .
Default is inferred from environment (TTY \-> human, non-TTY or agent env \-> json).
.TP
.BR \-\-json
Shorthand for
.BR \-\-format=json .
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-color
Disable colored output.
.TP
.BR \-\-color " " \fIWHEN\fR
Color mode: "auto", "always", or "never".
.TP
.BR \-\-dry\-run
Simulate the operation without making changes.
.TP
.BR \-\-verbose
Enable verbose logging.
.TP
.BR \-\-quiet
Suppress non-essential output.
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-yes ", " \-\-force
Skip confirmation prompts.
.TP
.BR \-\-fields " " \fIFIELDS\fR
Comma-separated list of JSON fields to emit. Useful for agent consumers.
.TP
.BR \-\-absolute\-time
Use absolute timestamps in output.
.TP
.BR \-\-print0
Separate records with NUL characters.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help information.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version information.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS "apply"
Apply DNS configuration for a provider and protocol.
.PP
.B dns apply
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI <provider>
.RI [ <tier> ]
.RI <protocol>
.PP
Options:
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-provider " " \fIPROVIDER\fR
Provider slug (e.g. "cloudflare", "google", "adguard").
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-tier " " \fITIER\fR
Tier name (e.g. "standard", "family", "malware").
.TP
.BR \-P ", " \-\-protocol " " \fIPROTOCOL\fR
Protocol: "plain", "dot", "doh", "doq", "dnscrypt", "warp".
.TP
.BR \-\-ipv4\-only
Use IPv4 only.
.TP
.BR \-\-ipv6\-only
Use IPv6 only.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-backup
Skip backup before applying.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-verify
Skip post-apply verification.
.TP
.BR \-\-ntp
Also configure NTP for the provider.
.TP
.BR \-\-vpn " " \fIVPN\fR
Also connect to the specified VPN provider ("warp" or "adguard").
.SS "status"
Show current DNS and VPN status.
.PP
.B dns status
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SS "list"
List providers, tiers, protocols, or VPN clients.
.PP
.B dns list
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.PP
Options:
.TP
.BR \-\-providers
List all providers.
.TP
.BR \-\-tiers
List tiers for a provider.
.TP
.BR \-\-protocols
List valid protocols for a provider and tier.
.TP
.BR \-\-vpn
List available VPN clients.
.TP
.BR \-\-provider " " \fIPROVIDER\fR
Provider slug (used with --tiers and --protocols).
.SS "detect"
Detect the active DNS backend, NTP backend, and package manager.
.PP
.B dns detect
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SS "backup"
Back up the current DNS configuration.
.PP
.B dns backup
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SS "restore"
Restore DNS configuration from the latest backup.
.PP
.B dns restore
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SS "verify"
Verify that DNS resolution is working.
.PP
.B dns verify
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SS "ntp"
Configure NTP for a provider.
.PP
.B dns ntp
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.PP
Options:
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-provider " " \fIPROVIDER\fR
Provider slug (default: "cloudflare").
.SS "vpn"
Manage VPN connections.
.PP
.B dns vpn
.RI <action>
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.PP
Actions:
.TP
.B connect
Connect to a VPN provider.
.TP
.B disconnect
Disconnect from a VPN provider.
.TP
.B status
Show VPN status.
.SS "schema"
Emit JSON schema of available commands and arguments.
.PP
.B dns schema
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SS "describe"
Emit tool manifest for agentic consumers.
.PP
.B dns describe
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SS "mcp"
Run the Model Context Protocol server.
.PP
.B dns mcp
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B dns detect
Detect system DNS backend.
.TP
.B dns apply cloudflare doh
Apply Cloudflare DNS over HTTPS.
.TP
.B dns apply cloudflare family doh
Apply Cloudflare DNS with family filtering.
.TP
.B dns apply adguard standard doq
Apply AdGuard DNS over QUIC (stub resolver fallback).
.TP
.B dns list --providers --json
List all providers as JSON.
.TP
.B dns list --protocols --provider cloudflare --json
List valid protocols for Cloudflare.
.TP
.B dns status --json
Show current DNS/VPN status as JSON.
.TP
.B dns backup --json
Back up current DNS configuration.
.TP
.B dns verify --json
Verify DNS resolution is working.
.TP
.B dns ntp --provider cloudflare --json
Configure NTP for Cloudflare.
.TP
.B dns vpn connect --provider warp --json
Connect to Cloudflare WARP.
.TP
.B dns schema --json
Emit command schema for LLM function calling.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
General error.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (invalid arguments, unknown provider/protocol).
.TP
.B 3
I/O error.
.TP
.B 4
Permission denied (elevation refused).
.TP
.B 5
Apply failed.
.TP
.B 6
Restore failed.
.TP
.B 7
Verify failed.
.TP
.B 8
Backup failed.
.TP
.B 9
VPN error.
.TP
.B 10
NTP error.
.TP
.B 64
Bad usage / CLI parsing error.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/resolv.conf
System resolver configuration (modified by some backends).
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/flux/backups/
Backup storage directory.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/flux/.tmp/
Temporary staging directory for privileged writes.
.TP
.I /etc/unbound/unbound.conf.d/flux.conf
unbound DoQ configuration (stub backend).
.TP
.I /etc/dnscrypt-proxy/flux.toml
dnscrypt-proxy configuration (stub backend).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disable colored output when set.
.TP
.B FORCE_COLOR
Force colored output when set.
.TP
.B AI_AGENT, AGENT, CI, CLAUDECODE, CURSOR_AGENT, GEMINI_CLI
Force JSON output and suppress interactive prompts when set.
.SH AUTHORS
Mohamed Hammad <Mohamed.Hammad@SpacecraftSoftware.org>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR resolv.conf (5),
.BR systemd-resolved (8),
.BR resolvectl (1),
.BR nmcli (1),
.BR unbound (8),
.BR dnscrypt-proxy (8),
.BR warp-cli (1)
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/Spacecraft-Software/flux/issues
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2026 Mohamed Hammad.
License: GPL-3.0-or-later.
